----
**Logistics:**

- **Meeting times:** Tue 9:00 to 10:00am EST

- **Location:** https://ietf.webex.com/ietf/j.php?MTID=ma0e97cc97c4cd71bb59cf1a094682686

- **Minute takers:** Jensen, Jordi, Kai, Luis, Mahdi, Qiao, Qin, Richard, Roland, Sabine.

- **Current minute taker:** Roland

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: June 28, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Chartered documents
- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2
- SIGCOMM NAI workshop
- IETF 114
- New I-Drafts
- Others in the Scrum dashboard

**Minutes:**

Note taker: Roland

**Agenda Item - Chartered Documents & ALTO Dashboard:**

- Go through the dashboard and the documents
- Info regarding RFC 9240 can be found on: https://www.rfc-editor.org/auth48/rfc9240
- Info regarding RFC 9241 can be found on: https://www.rfc-editor.org/auth48/rfc9241
- ALTO Transport draft was adopted by the WG, see: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-alto-new-transport/
  or github: https://github.com/ietf-wg-alto/draft-ietf-alto-new-transport
- Discussion regarding ALTO and PBE-CC team and how the converstation can be intensified
  - Richard can take the lead in the discussion with Alibaba and Princenton teams
  - Further activities can start in about 1 or 2 week
  - Qin reminds that we already had a meeting with both teams, idea that slides or an IETF draft will be generated by the teams, that we can start discussion on this 
    additional topics
  - Clarification regarding the contact persons is needed
- ALTO article
  - Pulish ALTO article, work is going on
  - Feedback form Med (Mohamed Boucadair) expected
  - Update our ALTO Wiki 

**Agenda Item - SIGCOMM NAI workshop**

- Try to engage people to participate and contribute
- Idea to get contribution from Meta/Metaverse
- Travel permissions are still an issue
- Try to get a VP level person from Meta
- Serveral VP levels speaker will take part of the conference
- Potential keynote speaker: Werner Vogels (VP & CTO at Amazon)
  - Option for remote presentation 
-  

**Agenda Item - IETF 114:**

- Discussion, if the MoWIE work shall be presented in the ALTO WG meeting slot
- Concerns that the time slots might be to small

**Agenda Item - New I-Drafts:**

- Design team for cellular network information
  - Connection to 3GPP required and coordination of the design teams
- Discussion on MoWIE draft
  - 3GPP is offering APIs, suggestion to integrate these in the ALTO work
 

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: June 21, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Chartered documents
- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2
- SIGCOMM NAI workshop
- IETF 114
- New I-Drafts
- Others in the Scrum dashboard

**Minutes:**

Note taker: Richard

Cellular network information design team: Yuhang from Tencent; schedule a meeting w/ Alibaba and Tencent;

An update of https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-li-alto-cellular-use-cases is posted, which is a second draft based on MOWIE. It has substantial work to move to standard. The authors invite people to look at the draft, which includes motivation, use cases, and each section highlights the need, which is available from 3GPP but not ALTO. Sabine encourages feedback and Qin (chair) encourages more collaboration from all members.

Authors need to approve the items in the RFC editor queue items: CDNi (Jan and Jensen approved; others need to approve, remind Richard and Kevin Ma, Jo); Unified Property (need to remind all authors to approve, look at the last modification, in terms of the formatting such as those turned into tables).

ALTO new transport adopted as WG document and need to update the new version -01 with new WG file name, collect all open issues in the appendix, discuss them on mailing list---each issue a separate thread, create github to track each issue.

ANE name in the path vector could benefit from the relaxation in the format of the ANE names in the base protocol RFC7285. In particular, only modification on the PIDName. Need to take care of backward compatibility. Option 1 modifies base protocol; Option 2 introduces Bis. A suggestion is to look at the approach of cost mode. Post an errata first to get attention and feedback.

A suggestion is to add the following best practice: add a link on the git to the email discussion.

OAM draft authors check w/ the netmod mailing list and discuss. Jensen already asked questions by posting to yangd doctor mailinglist. Suggest to post to netmod.

Update ALTO journal article based on Med's latest version and post by next weekly meeting.

Please engage more with the CAN BoF discussion. CAN has more remaining issues to be closed. There can be both centralized (e.g., ALTO) and distributed (e.g., any) solutions. Discussion of on-path or off-path solutions. Need fast reaction.

Discussion on how much WG need to focus on WG items (e.g., CAN and edge discovery).


----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: June 14, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Chartered documents
- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2
- SIGCOMM NAI workshop
- IETF 114
- New I-Drafts
- Others in the Scrum dashboard

**Minutes:**

Note taker: Qin

1. Jensen will take care of CDNI and address two remaining discussion points from RFC Editors.

2. Sabine will take care of Unified Property draft and provide feedback to RFC Editors in June 14.

3. Jensen gave a quick update of ALTO OAM and will raise discussion on the list.

4. Roland gave a quick update of ALTO transport progress and Richard and Kai needs to follow up with IPR call. Roland and Richard need to create a section to track the open issues and make update to the draft after the draft getted adopted.

5. ART review will be requested after ALTO Transport draft gets adopted.

6. Sabine will help review ALTO transport draft since she is believing it will be important topic related

to MOWIE.

7. CAN status update and the relation with ALTO has been discussed. It was agreed that ALTO can play an

important role in Edge discovery which is related to Luis's draft.

8. It was suggested to invite Danny and Rucio and CERN people to provide ALTO integration update which

is targeted to commerical use.

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: June 6, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2
- Chair request: Focus/prioritize ALTO Transport and ALTO OAM.  
- SIGCOMM NAI workshop

**Minutes:**

Note taker: Qiao

1. Richard to introduce Jordi to Princeton and Tencent team so they can work together on writing IETF drafts. (I missed the first 10-15 minutes of the meeting, so this point may not be precise.)
2. Open ticket on Unified Property:
   Sabine: in the base protocol, ANE has the same format of PID (i.e., no dots). So we need to fix the incorrect ANE names in the examples of the current UP draft, and propose a more flexible ANE name format as a small update (i.e., protocol maintenance) in the future charter. Similar things can be done for the cost-mode draft.
   Kai and Richard have the same opinion as well.
   Sabine to post this in the mailing list.
3. ALTO cost mode, no objection, already pass IESG
4. MIT Technology Review article: Richard to lead this effort. Jordi suggests doing the interview style, because the group may not have enough bandwidth. Qin suggests we focus more on other work such as ALTO article for the Internet protocol journal. Jordi is going through the admin process in his company to get clearance.
5. NAI:
   (1) Luis:NAI review assigned, 13 submissions, plan to accept ~6;
   (2) Invited paper:
       1 by Richard, Jordi about Rucio/FTS/CERN (waiting for Ruciao/CERN's response),
       1 by Telefonica, Deutsche Telekom, Linux Foundation and Cisco, this is about consuming network capability through interfaces.
       For the 3rd invited paper, Richard suggests two candidates:
         candidate 1: Facebook on entitlement/contract between planning/ops/apps of network  
         candidate 2: Harvey about the composable architecture of different experiments (e.g., CERN, SLAC and UCSD)
       Richard will reach out to Facebook first
   (3) Keynote speaker: Richard to approach Jon Crowcroft@Cambridge
       Others: Richard to collect this year's accepted paper authors to decide.
6. ALTO new transport:
   Richard: mostly done by adoption, now it's about re-iteration. Qin: need people to review it and provide feedback
7. Richard suggests inviting Nick Zhang's group to talk about their recently accepted SIGCOMM paper on deep queue (Q?) network
8. Jensen talks about his progress in the data model/service model of the OAM draft. He will summarize it in a ticket. 

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: May 31, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- PBE-CC Team discussion
- IETF ALTO discussion

**Minutes:**

Note taker: Mahdi

**1. Discussions**

- Professor Kyle Jamieson comment's on ALTO and NG-Scope: Two directions to implement [NG-Scope](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.05281.pdf) to do the telemetry and send the information on the client-side. 

1. At the UE (client-side) (Needs firmware design and changes to quickly capture the dynamics and react.)
2. Separated from the RAN infrastructures - Sits near the client and provides telemetry. 

- Dr. Yaxiong Xie comments on NG-Scope: Cellular networks are centrally controlled, where BSs do resource allocation, bit-rate adaptation, etc., so the idea of NG-Scope is to extract information from control messages. One way to integrate with ALTO is to feed the collected data into the ALTO server and retrieve it back. But the main question is where to collect information and where to deploy it?

- An example that aggregates the data at the receiver and provides information for fair CC at the client side is given [here](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3387514.3405880).

- Two fundamental questions are raised here: 

1. What information to collect? 
2. The scheme should be flexible and support "Carrier-aggregation" (Professor Jamieson's comment as a proper pathway for the integration of ALTO and NG-Scope). 

- As a multitude of CC algorithms are used by multiple vendors on a wide variety of application 

- An appropriate API is quintessential to aggregating the information. (One possible focus subject for ALTO as proposed by professor Jamieson.)

- Tencent has experience with radio information aggregation in two ways.  

* From BS to applications (for both out-band and in-band paths)
* RLI (Radio link information) to UEs. 

- Zili Meng's description of the Shortest Control Loop paper tries to address two main issues: Conventional feedback loops may face long delays due to long Sending + Marking + Receiving chains' delays, and possible drastic drops in the sending rates (by a factor of 10). The idea is to avoid queuing delays and send feedback directly to the sender.

**2. Directions**

- Professor Yang proposal: To possibly write a draft on how the NG-Scope-related protocol would look like in terms of API and the protocol requirements. As IETF promotes modular schemes this specification can be divided into three submodels, namely CC (as the application), information signaling, and the messaging protocol. 

- Chair's suggestions (Dr. Qin Wu): Before writing a draft we need to further elaborate on the discussions, and to perform a survey to summarize the work and analyze the requirements. WG should also seek feedback from 3GPP, and IESG transport and CC control groups (Tencent's group has the experience of working with 3GPP).

- Dr. Sabine Randriamasy: Since the ALTO WG is currently chartered, WG can work on physical layer information exposure as a use case, for now, to pave the way.  As an ALTO extension, which supports the application in cellular networks this use case should cover the following area.

1. Introduce the use case. 
2. Perform the gap analysis. 
3. Justify that ALTO is useful for this use case. 

- In terms of network abstractions and exposure, we should know how to stitch that information to guarantee cohesion among multiple domains.

**Links:**

- [MoWIE paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3405672.3409489): Adaptive network information exposure in mobile networks.

- [NG-Scope paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3405672.3409489): First-ever channel capacity telemetry tool in cellular networks

- [NG-Scope codebase](https://github.com/YaxiongXiePrinceton/NG-Scope)

- [RFC 8888](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc8888/) Interactive real-time CC using RTP (messaging format)

- [PBE-CC](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3387514.3405880) CC in cellular networks using physical layer BW measurements

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: May 24, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2
- Chair request: Focus/prioritize ALTO Transport and ALTO OAM.  
- SIGCOMM NAI workshop

**Minutes:**

Note Taker: Luis

- ALTO Transport (Roland / Richard): update behind schedule. To be recovered during next weeks. Updates include description of transport queue information, communication flows, appendix on ALTO and http/3, etc.
- ALTO OAM (Jensen): working on open issues raised during last IETF meeting (data model for client side, config server level management). Checking related work (e.g., NETCONF) to improve the model. More disucssions needed.
- ALTO cost mode (Kai): still waiting for further feedbacks. Now 8 YES, No objections so far.
- ALTO tutorial: to be consider for the NAI workshop, depending on the number of submitted papers.
- SIGCOMM NAI workshop (Luis / all): deadline on MAy 25th, 6 papers submitted by now, around 6 more known to be submitted. To take decisions once we have clear the final status in terms of number of submissions. Consider ALTO tutotial, invited papers (one now identified), etc. 
- ALTO article for Internet Protocol journal
- Guest speakers (Richard): 
   * Talk from Princeton team scheduled for next week. Considering also participation/talks from Alibaba and Tencent. Discussions can help to profile topics for rechartering, specifically in this case leverage on ALTO for visualization of physical information. Target date: May 31th.
   * Additional talk from Microsoft. Target date: June 7th. 
- Rucio info in ALTO format (Jordi / Richard): pursuing unified single model.

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: May 17, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- John Graham 5G Project in PRP: IETF ALTO, SRv6, Bottleneck Structure Graphs
- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2

**Minutes:**

Note Taker: Kai

John gave a wonderful talk on "5G End to End OTA PRP/NRP O-RAN testbed". The talk was mainly on the PRP/NRP platform. Designed to provide a composable and end-to-end programmable 5G platform, the platform is built with programmable switches and FPGAs to provide complete data plane programmability and Kubernetes to provide service orchestration. Some highlights include

- The platform now has 3 sites and 8 subnetworks
- Xilinx and Open-AIR put up a demo that FPGA acceleration achieves 10x speed-up in 5G streaming
- The 5G core is based on O-RAN but can potentially be compatible with other technologies. The platform also provides a field to test the interoperability of different 5G technologies
- The platform is running on top of a multi-domain network with multiple controllers but provides end-to-end SRv6 programmability through the SENSE/AutoGole fabric. There is also an ongoing effort to reprogram BGP for performance-aware flow steering
- The platform is used by NSF award-winning projects such as SAGE. Showcases include fire detection based on LoRA, multi-view camera stitching, and high frame-rate thermal dynamics

Questions and discussions (briefs):

- Jordi: What applications are running on the GPUs
- John: Pretty much any workload
- Jordi: How do you envision how ALTO/openALTO can be used in this architecture?
- John: ALTO can be used by the orchestrator for POD placement: create latency heatmap, split into 6 zones of service pools, and have k8s place the pods where they perform best. The clusters will have awareness to the network. The other application is when Rucio finds that a job cannot be delivered in time, reprogram BGP to get a different priority path. Have ALTO to help figure out the best paths to deliver among multiple channels
- Harvey: When the progress is insufficient, how does the job get accelerated? When you have an L2 overlay, what you do is to moderate the flow rate? Which tools we are going to use to accelerate the rate? 
- John: Creating multiple SENSE paths. Each one with a different QoS setting. You can tell BGP to transit the flow from one path to another.
- Harvey: We can use FireQoS (?) to moderate the rate
- John: This is one way to solve the problem. There are other options, e.g., using P4 switches.
- Jordi: We think of this as a really great platform to deploy the job in the WG. What John and his team is building is a highly controllable and programmable network. Some of the use cases are related to the drafts that we are writing, e.g., how to optimize applications running in the edge clouds. John mentioned the notion of visibility, intelligence, and control. Use ALTO to build a latency heatmap for POD placement. We look at this as a way to deploy the ALTO/openALTO work.
- Luis: How is SRv6 used in the platform? 
- John: We want to have SRv6 end-to-end. Calico VPP is the overlay network used in K8s. 
- Luis: Tuning the BGP, do you consider this with traffic engineering?
- John: What functions are missing in Calico VPP is another question. VPN is already there, some form of segment routing works but what actually works needs to be understood. 
- Luis: We are also working on O-ran. An ongoing work is to expose topology to help the O-RAN management.
- Richard: Potential architecture of overall network. Two types: private network, and public network (Internet). Do you envision this is a specific architecture or it can be generic? 
- John: We are providing a garden of architectures. We have a good commitment of latest accelerators and embrace constant changes by adding the new capabilities.
- Richard: ALTO path vector is a generalization of the BGP protocol. It's great that we have generic architecture.
- John: What we are looking into is to make k8s a network-aware orchestrator based on the ALTO protocol. We use namespace and federated through namespace.
- Harvey: To start imagine composable infra where different subsystems need to work under different contexts/use cases. Tools like the path vector which has the abstract concept of cost which allows stateful decisions. There is no single architecture. Success of SENSE is to engage many different regions of the world and deploy things. Get common things by doing. Start pursuing composable architecture.
- Richard: K8s is using predicates + ranking architecture. 
- Harvey: John mentioned few things. If you have an approaching deadline, it's not just a point decision, it's a lifecycle management system.
- John: We've already extended the k8s scheduler. Give priorities to different namespaces, different nodes. Inform the state of the workflow, with daemons integrated into nautilus. We have instrumented everything to discover what the cluster is telling us. Instead of having application to figure out what is best, we can have dedicated containers to do that.
- Richard: Do you consider the state sharing in etcd?
- John: Shared state is federated through the etcd
- Jordi: We track the [meeting minutes](https://github.com/ietf-wg-alto/wg-materials/blob/main/meetings-ietf-alto/ietf-openalto-5G-PRP-NRP-ORAN-2022.md) for the meeting on Monday. Putting the demo about the integration in SC'22.

The WG also provides updates on the board items.

Cost Mode: 
- Kai: cost mode is now in IEST evaluation

ANE name format:
- Sabine: follow option 1 on the ANE name format issue 

New transport:
- Richard: a new version will be uploaded
- Qin: once the new version is uploaded, it should be sent to HTTP2 WG for review

OAM:
- Jensen: dig into solving the configuration part
- Qin: if there is any open issue, discuss on the mailing list

NAI:
- Luis: already have 5 submissions, advertised again. The deadline is officially May 25

John mentioned that he and his team will continue to work on the Jupyter lab + ALTO integration, which will make PRP/NRP as a platform for future ALTO development/testing/hackathons.

WIP

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: May 10, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Reminder that using Github scrum is not a substitute for using ALTO mailing list. 
  Good practice: use ALTO mailing list with pointers to Github tickets.
  
- Confirm the NAI deadline
  
- Review of 'In Progress/Discussion' tasks: https://github.com/orgs/ietf-wg-alto/projects/1/views/2

**Minutes:**

Note Taker: Jordi Ros-Giralt

- ANE name: https://github.com/ietf-wg-alto/draft-ietf-alto-unified-props-new/issues/1  
- Will take simple action 
- Requested 2-hour slot for IETF 114 
- Invite people to present first in our weekly meeting, then to the IETF  
- Major trend in community how to understand how a network works
- ALTO is modeling tool 
- Combination of 3: visibility, intelligence, controllability 
- Discrete simulation is superslow 
- Modeling: accuracy issue 
- Continuous discrete differential equation simulation, could be good for ALTO 
- ALTO just focuses on query interface, you need to build the database 
- For long we care a lot about northbound, we need to care more about southbound 
- We have ALTO OAM 
- Invite key people to discuss this to build the model 
- MIT / digital twin 
- Use ALTO / MOWIE for gaming 
- Solve lack of interaction with 3GPP 
- Flow level continuous simulator 
- We also want to cover compute-aware networking, network as a service. We need to balance. 
- A third direction: Application specifies needs using a language and compile it down to the network 

----

**IETF ALTO Meeting: May 3, 2022**

**Agenda:**

- Update on new bookkeeping records for agenda/minutes 
- Update around the table
- Minutes/Feedback from DOMA meeting on April 27
- WG document: OAM
- NAI submissions

**Minutes:**

Note Taker: Jensen Zhang

Jordi introduced how the current meeting minutes workflow works.

> People will rotate to be the note taker. Jensen will be the note taker for this time.

A quick round table:
- Jordi and Richard presented ALTO in DOMA meeting. Kai and many other people also helped the preparation of the presentation.
- Jensen organized issues to meet the next IETF milestone for the ALTO O&M draft.
- Luis updated the NAI workshop organization.
- Mahdi updated the documentation for OpenALTO tutorial.
- Qiao mentioned that he and his students were working on a multi-domain work for the coming NAI submission.
- Roland updated progress on the new transport update.
- Sabine updated her work on a new potential extension for ALTO.
- Richard brought updates about conversations with both DOMA/CERN and military people.

Sabine raised an issue for ANE name:
- Connected to issue #22: https://github.com/ietf-wg-alto/wg-materials/issues/22
- The specification of ANE name in the PV document reuses the PID name encoding in RFC7285, which reserves the usage of '.' seperator. The example in Sec 10.9 may violate the specification.
- Kai gave comments on potential solutions. But need futher discussions offline.
- Richard posted a question: The current inter-domain protocol, BGP, is designed on PV protocol, which is based on the dynamic programming algorithm. It may not be efficient for nowadays applications. Can we redesign the propogation process for the inter-domain protocol?
  - Richard will explain this question clearly after the meeting.

Jordi helped to go over the other in-progress items in the ALTO Srum Dashboard.

Kai suggested to improve the meeting process, e.g., put a time limit for each item, and move some low-priority work offline.
